THE BOOK OF GENESIS

This book is so called from its treating of the GENERATION, that is,
of the creation and the beginning of the world. The Hebrews call it
BERESITH, from the Word with which it begins. It contains not only
the history of the Creation of the world; but also an account of its
progress during the space of 2369 years, that is, until the death of
JOSEPH.


Genesis Chapter 1

God createth Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, in six days.

1:1. In the beginning God created heaven, and earth.

1:2. And the earth was void and empty, and darkness was upon the face of
the deep; and the spirit of God moved over the waters.

1:3. And God said: Be light made. And light was made.

1:4. And God saw the light that it was good; and he divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5. And he called the light Day, and the darkness Night; and there was
evening and morning one day.

1:6. And God said: Let there be a firmament made amidst the waters: and
let it divide the waters from the waters.

A firmament... By this name is here understood the whole space between
the earth, and the highest stars. The lower part of which divideth the
waters that are upon the earth, from those that are above in the clouds.

1:7. And God made a firmament, and divided the waters that were under
the firmament, from those that were above the firmament, and it was so.

1:8. And God called the firmament, Heaven; and the evening and morning
were the second day.

1:9. God also said; Let the waters that are under the heaven, be
gathered together into one place: and let the dry land appear. And it
was so done.

1:10. And God called the dry land, Earth; and the gathering together of
the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.

1:11. And he said: let the earth bring forth green herb, and such as may
seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind, which may have
seed in itself upon the earth. And it was so done.

1:12. And the earth brought forth the green herb, and such as yieldeth
seed according to its kind, and the tree that beareth fruit, having seed
each one according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:13. And the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14. And God said: Let there be lights made in the firmament of heaven,
to divide the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days and years:

1:15. To shine in the firmament of heaven, and to give light upon the
earth, and it was so done.

1:16. And God made two great lights: a greater light to rule the day;
and a lesser light to rule the night: and the stars.

Two great lights... God created on the first day, light, which being
moved from east to west, by its rising and setting, made morning and
evening. But on the fourth day he ordered and distributed this light,
and made the sun, moon, and stars. The moon, though much less than the
stars, is here called a great light, from its giving a far greater light
to the earth than any of them.

1:17. And he set them in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the
earth.

1:18. And to rule the day and the night, and to divide the light and the
darkness. And God saw that it was good.

1:19. And the evening and morning were the fourth day.

1:20. God also said: let the waters bring forth the creeping creature
having life, and the fowl that may fly over the earth under the
firmament of heaven.

1:21. And God created the great whales, and every living and moving
creature, which the waters brought forth, according to their kinds, and
every winged fowl according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:22. And he blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
waters of the sea: and let the birds be multiplied upon the earth.

1:23. And the evening and morning were the fifth day.

1:24. And God said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature in its
kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth, according to
their kinds. And it was so done.

1:25. And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds, and
cattle, and every thing that creepeth on the earth after its kind. And
God saw that it was good.

1:26. And he said: Let us make man to our image and likeness: and let
him have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air,
and the beasts, and the whole earth, and every creeping creature that
moveth upon the earth.

Let us make man to our image... This image of God in man, is not in the
body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual substance, endued with
understanding and free will. God speaketh here in the plural number, to
insinuate the plurality of persons in the Deity.

1:27. And God created man to his own image: to the image of God he
created him: male and female he created them.

1:28. And God blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth, and subdue it, and rule over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls
of the air, and all living creatures that move upon the earth.

Increase and multiply... This is not a precept, as some Protestant
controvertists would have it, but a blessing, rendering them fruitful;
for God had said the same words to the fishes, and birds, (ver. 22) who
were incapable of receiving a precept.

1:29. And God said: Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed upon
the earth, and all trees that have in themselves seed of their own kind,
to be your meat:

1:30. And to all beasts of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and
to all that move upon the earth, and wherein there is life, that they
may have to feed upon. And it was so done.

1:31. And God saw all the things that he had made, and they were very
good. And the evening and morning were the sixth day.

Genesis Chapter 2

God resteth on the seventh day and blesseth it. The earthly paradise, in
which God placeth man. He commandeth him not to eat of the tree of
knowledge. And formeth a woman of his rib.

2:1. So the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the furniture
of them.

2:2. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made: and he
rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had done.

He rested, etc... That is, he ceased to make or create any new kinds of
things. Though, as our Lord tells us, John 5.17, "He still worketh",
viz., by conserving and governing all things, and creating souls.

2:3. And he blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because in it he
had rested from all his work which God created and made.

2:4. These are the generations of the heaven and the earth, when they
were created, in the day that the Lord God made the heaven and the
earth:

2:5. And every plant of the field before it sprung up in the earth, and
every herb of the ground before it grew: for the Lord God had not rained
upon the earth; and there was not a man to till the earth.

2:6. But a spring rose out of the earth, watering all the surface of the
earth.

2:7. And the Lord God formed man of the slime of the earth: and breathed
into his face the breath of life, and man became a living soul.

2:8. And the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the
beginning: wherein he placed man whom he had formed.

2:9. And the Lord God brought forth of the ground all manner of trees,
fair to behold, and pleasant to eat of: the tree of life also in the
midst of paradise: and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

The tree of life... So called because it had that quality, that by
eating of the fruit of it, man would have been preserved in a constant
state of health, vigour, and strength, and would not have died at all.
The tree of knowledge... To which the deceitful serpent falsely
attributed the power of imparting a superior kind of knowledge, beyond
that which God was pleased to give.

2:10. And a river went out of the place of pleasure to water paradise,
which from thence is divided into four heads.

2:11. The name of the one is Phison: that is it which compasseth all the
land of Hevilath, where gold groweth.

2:12. And the gold of that land is very good: there is found bdellium,
and the onyx stone.

2:13. And the name of the second river is Gehon: the same is it that
compasseth all the land of Ethiopia.

2:14. And the name of the third river is Tigris: the same passeth along
by the Assyrians. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

2:15. And the Lord God took man, and put him into the paradise of
pleasure, to dress it, and to keep it.

2:16. And he commanded him, saying: Of every tree of paradise thou shalt
eat:

2:17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat.
For in what day soever thou shalt eat of it, thou shalt die the death.

2:18. And the Lord God said: It is not good for man to be alone: let us
make him a help like unto himself.

2:19. And the Lord God having formed out of the ground all the beasts of
the earth, and all the fowls of the air, brought them to Adam to see
what he would call them: for whatsoever Adam called any living creature
the same is its name.

2:20. And Adam called all the beasts by their names, and all the fowls
of the air, and all the cattle of the field: but for Adam there was not
found a helper like himself.

2:21. Then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam: and when he was
fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and filled up flesh for it.

2:22. And the Lord God built the rib which he took from Adam into a
woman: and brought her to Adam.

2:23. And Adam said: This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

2:24. Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife: and they shall be two in one flesh.

2:25. And they were both naked: to wit, Adam and his wife: and were not
ashamed.